# Sorting

Sorting is fundamental to algorithm design. Many efficient algorithms use
sorting as a building block, because some problems are more easily solving
using it. As an example, the task of finding out if an array has two equal
elements can be easily solved by sorting it and checking if there are any
repeating values.

There are many algorithms for sorting, and their general efficiency is O(n log
n).

## Theory

A sorting algorithm reorders the elements of an array in a specified order.
This is generally the increasing order. We will talk about the increasing order
because it's the most common and useful one.

For example:

```
Before sorting: 1, 2, 4, 3
After sorting: 1, 2, 3, 4
```

## O(n^2) algorithms

Naive sorting algorithms work in O(n^2) time. They usually consist of two
nested loops. One of the most famous is called bubble sort.

```cpp

for (int i = 0; i < n; ++i) {
	for (int j = 0; j < n - 1; ++j) {
		if (array[j] > array[j + 1]) {
			swap(array[j], array[j + 1]);
		}
	}
}
```

### Inversions

Bubble sort always swaps consecutive elements. This paradigm always requires at
least O(n^2) time.

A useful concept when talking sorting is an inversion. An inversion is a pair
of elements array\[a\] and array\[b\] such that a < b and array\[a\] >
array\[b\].

Swapping consecutive elements removes exactly one inversion. If an algorithm
can only remove one inversion per iteration, its time complexity is at least
O(n^2);

### O(n log n) algorithms

#### Merge sort

An array can be sorted efficiently in O(nlog n) by using algorithms not limited
to swapping consecutive elements. A widely known algorithm of this kind is
merge sort.

Merge sort sorts a subarray array\[a ... b\] in this way:

1. If a = b, it's already sorted. Do nothing.

2. Find the middle element: k = (a + b) / 2.

3. Recursively sort subarray\[a ... k\].

4. Recursively sort subarray\[k + 1 ... b\].

5. Merge array\[a ... k\] and array\[k + 1 ... b\] into a single array
array\[a ... b\].

Merge sort is efficient because it halves the array at each step. The recursion
has O(log n) levels, and each level takes O(n) times. Merging the subarrays is
linear, because they're already sorted.

#### Sorting lower bound

It's impossible to sort an array faster than in O(n log n), if we restrict
ourselves to comparing array elements.

I'll finish this later.
